# restricted

## Summary

[`restricted`] crate ([`prudent-rs/restricted`](https://github.com/prudent-rs/restricted)) prevents
**consumers** of your Rust macros from

- accidental, or
- intentional (well-intended or malicious)

inconsistent, unguarded, corrupt or `unsafe` access to your macro's internals. It enables **your
crates** to have private-like variables, functions and types, shared by **multiple** macros.

That is _unlike_ standard items and variables defined by macros, which, if hygienic, are visible
only to the macro that defined them, _but_ not to any successive invocations of macros
from the same crate.

[`restricted`] makes these variables, functions and types visible also to your **other** macros,
invoked **after** the invocation that generates them.

## What (tl;dr)

[`restricted`] crate provides macros that allow you, a macro author, to prevent consumers of your
macros from accessing to your [declaration
statements](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/statements.html#declaration-statements) (that is:
[items](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/statements.html) and variables, even if declared with
[`Span::call_site()`]).

## Why?

Macros generate code that blends, or is injected, into the invocator's source code. But
- `macro_rules!` are hygienic about `let`/`let mut`. That is good for isolation. However, it doesn't
  allow your other macro(s) to access the same variable(s) again.
- `macro_rules!` are non-hygienic about any other items they define. Consumers of these macros can
  access to your macro's internals!
- proc macros
  - can apply [`Span::mixed_site()`] to act just like `macro_rules!`
  - can generate other items (and hence any items) as hygienic with [`Span::call_site()`]
  - can generate any items as non-hygienic with [`Span::def_site()`], but on `nightly` Rust
    toolchain only.

## How?

[`restricted`] generates

- random-based names for your macro's items and variables, and
- accessor macros that can be invoked only from your macro(s) and not by the consumer code (by
  validating the [`Span`]).

[`restricted`] provides macros for

- declaration of (local) `let` and `let mut` variables
- definition of `static` and `const` items
  - and both of the above create local macros to access those variables or `const` or `static` items
- local re-export of private items (from a submodule) and
  - macros to access those re-exports by specifying the item's "short name", and
  - "direct" local macros to access those re-exports (one macro per item).

## Simple syntax only

There are two reason why [`restricted`] crate supports simple syntax only:

- Supporting full grammar of `fn`, `type`, or `struct/enum/union` or `impl` definitions (with
  generics and bounds), would be complicated and difficult to write. Difficult even to read or to
  search in.
  
  And, migrating existing code to it would involve extra work.
- Let's say that we would cover the full grammar of `fn`, `type`, `struct/enum/union` and `impl`
  definitions. If a macro returns their names/path, such a macro *can* be used in Rust code instead
  of the name (for many purposes - not for all). For example:
  ```rust
    macro_rules! def_struct_s {
        () => {
            struct S {}
            impl S {
                const fn new() -> Self {
                    Self {}
                }
            }
        };
    }
    def_struct_s!();
    
    // accessor macro. This is a simplified example that does not perform Span validation.
    // `restricted` implements the `Span` validation by forwarding to a procedural macro.
    macro_rules! StructS {
        ($token_carrier: tt) => {
            S
        };
    }

    const _: StructS!(.) = <StructS!(.)>::new();

    pub fn take_value(_: StructS!(.)) {}
    pub fn take_ref(_: &StructS!(.)) {}
    pub fn return_value() -> StructS!(.) {
        todo!()
    }

    type StructAlias = StructS!(.);
    const _: StructS!(.) = StructAlias {};
  ```
  However, there is no way to apply the same to `trait` items. For those we have to re-export them.
  And since we're doing so, we can use the re-export method for `fn`, `type`, `struct/enum/union`
  and `impl` items, too.

### Simple syntax for let, let mut: no pattern matching in definitions

That's aligned with how `const` and `static` work already. They allow only simple, one identifier
per each `const` or `static` definition. Rust refuses definitions like:
```rust,compile_fail
const (_FIRST_CONST,_SECOND_CONST) : (bool, u8) = (true, 1);
static (_FIRST_STATIC, _SECOND_STATIC) : (bool, u8) = (true, 1);
```

## Why supporting let and let mut

Any `let` and `let mut` variables generated by `macro_rules` (and by proc macros with
[`Span::mixed_site()`] *are* hygienic, so they can't be accessed from outside (of the macro that
created them).

However, such `let` and `let mut` variables then can't be accessed from other macro(s), even if
those other macro(s) are from the same crate (the crate which created the macro that created the
variable).

## Blockers and related issues

Please give thumbs up (and contribute, if you can) to

- [SergioBenitez/proc-macro2-diagnostics#13](https://github.com/SergioBenitez/proc-macro2-diagnostics/issues/13)
  defect: Error message and details missing, when macro fails to generate main() on STABLE
- [SergioBenitez/proc-macro2-diagnostics#12](https://github.com/SergioBenitez/proc-macro2-diagnostics/issues/12)
  tests/stable/errors.rs fails with Rust 1.89.0 and also stable 1.95.0

## UTF-8 and Unicode

### Requiring UTF-8

Source file paths have be in UTF-8.

### Normally non-ASCII Unicode-friendly

<!-- @TODO
[`restricted`] _does_ allow (probably most) non-ASCII identifiers, as per [Rust RFC
2457](https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/2457-non-ascii-idents.html). You can have non-ASCII characters in either/both

- `path` right of `@` (optional; like `$crate` or `$crate::module::submodule` if used from a consumer/3rd party macro),
  and
- the `name` (given by you or the developer of the consumer/3rd party macro).
-->

## NOT watt-compatible

NOT compatible with [dtolnay/watt](https://github.com/dtolnay/watt) (because of side effects of
`build.rs`).

<!-- references: -->
[`restricted`]: https://crates.io/crates/restricted
[`Span::call_site()`]:
    https://docs.rs/proc-macro2/latest/proc_macro2/struct.Span.html#method.call_site
[`Span::mixed_site()`]:
    https://docs.rs/proc-macro2/latest/proc_macro2/struct.Span.html#method.mixed_site
[`Span::def_site()`]:
    https://docs.rs/proc-macro2/latest/proc_macro2/struct.Span.html#method.def_site
[`Span`]: https://docs.rs/proc-macro2/latest/proc_macro2/struct.Span.html
